Although this letter reflects on our work in 2019, as I write these words, the world is facing its biggest crisis since World War II. We stand in solidarity with the billions of people around the world that are suffering the impact of the global pandemic of COVID-19 and extend our heartfelt gratitude to the millions of healthcare professionals and members of the United Nations family, including the World Health Organization (WHO), who are working around the clock to protect us. In due course, this crisis will call for a stronger line of enquiry into environment and health, as the connection between the health of people and the health of our planet is so fundamental, yet so often ignored. At this time, however, the immediate priority is to protect people by limiting the spread of COVID-19.

2019 was, despite its many challenges, a year that gave me hope. I was inspired by the millions of young people who took to our streets demanding action for the environment. And they were heard. Governments and businesses stepped forward with innovative policies and actions. While this global awakening is just a start, I am optimistic that we can ramp up our ambitions and actions for biodiversity and climate.
The context of the development of the Medium-Term Strategy 2022–2025 provides an opportunity for the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to do even better. We can be more efficient. More focused. More impactful. Transforming UNEP into the best that we can be will be one of my top priorities going forward. That change will only happen with full buy-in and leadership from UNEP’s amazing staff. 
2019 was also a year of deep tragedy for UNEP and the broader United Nations family. The deadly crash of an Ethiopian Airlines plane on its way to Nairobi with delegates to the United Nations Environment Assembly resulted in the death of all 157 people on board – United Nations staff, youth delegates, scientists, members of academia and other partners. Among them was our dear UNEP colleague Victor Tsang. The way in which UNEP staff rallied in the face of such a disaster and organized the most successful Assembly ever is testament to the talent and dedication of this team. 