In 2019, a landmark report by the UNEP-hosted Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) warned that the pace of nature’s decline is unprecedented in human history. This clarion call, which made front-page headlines worldwide, spelled out what is needed: a fundamental reorganization across technological, economic and social systems.
Still, the report showed that it is not too late. If we commit to change, nature can still be conserved, restored and used sustainably. And use it we must. Nature is the most effective and cost-efficient solution to many of the challenges we face. 
At the United Nations Secretary-General’s Climate Action Summit last September, UNEP unveiled more than 150 proposals for nature-based solutions as part of the launch of the Nature-Based Solutions for Climate Manifesto, which offers a roadmap to unlock the full potential of nature for climate action and development. 
The tremendous capacity of nature to help us in our time of need will be at the heart of the United Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration. The United Nations General Assembly last year tasked UNEP to work with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to lead the 2021–2030 Decade and scale up efforts to prevent, halt and reverse the degradation of ecosystems worldwide. 
A critical moment for nature will come when the world agrees on a new post-2020 framework for biodiversity at the 15th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the UNEP-hosted Convention on Biological Diversity. As 2019 drew to a close, the team was finalizing a zero draft. In addition to ambitious, measurable targets, success will only come with a real commitment for action by all sectors of government and society – especially business. 
Ahead of the December climate summit in Madrid, our Emissions Gap Report helped drive the agenda. The report said that we either cut greenhouse gas emissions by 7.6 per cent every year from now until 2030 or accept that our world will warm by more than 3°C by the end of the century. Quoting the report, the Secretary-General told delegates at the summit’s opening that the only solution is rapid transformative action by all – governments, regions, cities, businesses and civil society. If we fail, “the impact on all life on the planet – including ours – will be catastrophic,” he warned. 

Earlier in the year, UNEP released its sixth Global Environment Outlook – the most comprehensive and rigorous assessment on the state of the environment. It warned that millions of people in Asia, the Middle East and Africa could die prematurely from water and air pollution by 2050 unless urgent action is taken. The report also sounded the alarm on pollutants – including antibiotics – in our freshwater systems, saying that resulting antimicrobial resistance could become a major cause of death. The report informed major policy discussions, including China’s next Five-Year Plan as well as the European Union’s Green New Deal, and the Association of American Publishers awarded the Outlook its Award for Environmental Science. 

With chemical production forecast to almost double by 2030 – and an urgent need to decouple this growth from damage to human health and the environment – our research has informed the process to draft a post-2020 framework for the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management. Our second Global Chemicals Outlook noted that the framework must bring together all relevant sectors and organizations to foster collaborative, ambitious action. If we get this right, it will help halt biodiversity loss and contribute to achieving other Sustainable Development Goals and targets. 