The technical assistance provided by the Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN), the operational arm of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Technology Mechanism, has contributed to anticipated emission reductions of 11.8 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent per year and benefited 90 million people. The CTCN knowledge platform is the world’s largest source of online technology information, including technology descriptions, webinars, thousands of case studies and country plans. By December 2019, the Centre, co-hosted by UNEP and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, had provided 188 technology solutions to 100 developing countries.
In 2019, we successfully raised additional funding for our Seed Capital Assistance Facility, which has mobilized over US$2.6 billion in development co-financing, project finance and fund capitalization for renewable energy development across 27 developing countries in Africa and Asia. 
Efficient, climate-friendly cooling offers significant potential for cuts in emissions. Last April, together with partners, we launched the Cool Coalition to invigorate the search for solutions. We are already working in 25 countries and with 90 partners. Cooling is an important blind spot in climate action: a 30 per cent improvement in the energy efficiency of room air conditioners could avoid the need for 2,500 power plants and save almost US$3 trillion by 2050. At the Secretary-General’s Climate Action Summit, partners of the Cool Coalition announced new commitments, including national cooling plans, business reform and funding. 
We are honoured to work with and through many critical multilateral environmental agreements to advance progress on critical issues from biodiversity and ecosystems to regional seas and chemical waste management. UNEP serves as a “docking station” for these accords, which illustrate the power of collective action to tackle environmental issues that are too big for any one nation alone. One such example came in 2019 when the world took an important step to drastically reduce the production and consumption of damaging greenhouse gases, known as hydrofluorocarbons, and limit global warming. On 1 January 2019, the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer came into force. At that time, it had been ratified by 65 countries. By the end of the year, that number had grown to 91. 